# DR-Detection-using-CapsNet-Architecture

**Abstract:** Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is an eye condition that can lead to vision loss and blindness in people who have diabetes. The manual screening of color fundus images to detect DR at early stages is expensive and time consuming. This process requires a trained clinician to examine and evaluate the diseased images, but this analysis is monotonous and error prone. Hence, various computer vision hands-on engineering techniques and machine learning models are applied to predict the occurrences of the DR and its stages automatically, but these methods are computationally expensive due to pre-processing techniques. Therefore, this study focuses on analysis of five different DR stages using Deep Neural Networks (DNN) without pre- or post-processing of retinal images to overcome the above limitations. We proposed a model called Capsule Neural Network (CapsNet) which adopts the concept of capsules to address the weakness in existing algorithms. Capsule neural network helps to perform the functions of a CNN with improved architecture and with for more robust classification. We used Kaggle (EyePACS) Dataset in this paper to train and test our model. There are five DR stages: 0 - No DR, 1 – Mild, 2 – Moderate, 3 – Severe, 4 - Proliferative DR. We trained and tested our model on an enormous dataset (6726) train images and (1682) test images to automatically detect the DR stages. In this research patient's fundus eye images are used as input parameters without applying any pre-processing techniques on eye images  and the model (CapsNet) is trained for 150 epochs with batch size of 64 and tested on test dataset to predict the current stage of DR. The proposed model on challenging dataset (EyePACS) indicates that it outperforms state-of-the-art methods with average accuracy score of 0.76 without pre-processing techniques. Performance metrics: Average accuracy of 0.76, Recall of 0.73, Precision of 0.53, and F1 score  of 0.61 are obtained and plotted ROC curves to support the suitable performance of the model.

**Dataset from Kaggle:** https://www.kaggle.com/c/diabetic-retinopathy-detection/data
